there's a lot of misconceptions around
how we get bags under our eyes I always
assume it's their stressed and they
haven't been sleeping so I did research
to look into this and a lot of people
don't know this but it's actually really
mhm so if I never want to get mags into
my eyes again what is the natural easy
solution try this Dr Joseph Allen is the
board certified eye doctor helping
millions of people understand Eye Health
and unlocking the secrets behind
achieving sharper and healthier Vision I
really want to talk to you about so many
misconceptions because I don't know
what's true sure okay so my vision loss
being inevitable is that true
unfortunately there are changes that
occur with age that will change your
eyesight and vision but there's a lot of
things that can help prevent and slow
down progression and we'll go into them
and then every once in a while my eyelid
starts twitching what is that eyelid
mimia so that is your threshold of your
stress to get more sleep and stop
drinking so much caffeine what about
blue light is that harmful the blue
light that comes from your digital
screens has consistently shown in
research to not increase the risk of
Aging eye diseases and research on using
L like glasses shows that it could just
be placebo effect but if you're worried
about how blue light's affecting you
just moving your phone back twice as far
will decrease your blue light exposure
by 75% and more people are starting to
care about their Eye Health than ever
before but is our Eye Health getting
better or worse worse for example right
now about 30% of the world's population
is nearsighted but by about 2050 we will
have about 50% of being nearsighted
because of our lifestyle so how much
screen time being indoors reading books
up close is okay it depends on age so
question if you could sit at a table
with any four guests from the dire of
CEO who would you choose here's a
challenge for the entire D CEO Community
if we hit 10 million subscribers by the
end of
2024 you will get to pick four guests
for your dream conversation and you can
make it weird or you can make it
wonderful and here is the best part
3,000 of you that subscribe will be
invited to join this conversation live
in in person and for free subscribe now
and let's make this happen
[Music]
together who are you what you do and I
think most importantly of all why is it
so important that you do it I am a
doctor of Optometry I am a fellow of the
American Academy of Optometry and I am a
diplomat of the American Board of
Optometry so I practice iare here in the
US
and I see patients for all sorts of eye
conditions whether that be diagnosing
managing anything from vision problems
simply as like near sidess or stigmatism
to fitting contact lenses to diagnosing
different diseases in the back of the
eye and then prescribing medications or
therapy to try and prevent that from
getting worse or to help treat
it on top of all of this uh I also host
various on on various social media
channels a educational website about
helping people learn about the eyes
their vision and finding the best Vision
products and that really falls back
to my mission of just helping people see
their very best today but also keeping
them see their best
tomorrow and when you think about where
we are as humans as it relates to our
Eye Health like what's the macro picture
like what's going on it I don't know
whether it's just because I'm I'm
getting older but I'm wondering if more
people are starting to care about their
Eye Health than ever before and if they
are why and is our Eye Health getting
better or
worse I I I want to say that the I think
people generally are being more
interested in eyes and vision
unfortunately part of that is probably
because they're noticing more
problems right people are starting to
notice dysfunctions or more problems
with their eye strain they're noticing
more problems with dry eye
children uh are starting to become
nearsighted faster and to Greater
degrees and because of those factors
we're also seeing a lot more eye health
conditions in the back of the eye um
that also is reflected with other
metabolic diseases like diabetes
significantly causes damage and leads to
potential blindness inside the eye so
there's there's a lot of factors to it
what's changing you know you referred to
some of the situations there as becoming
more or Worse Etc that would suggest
that there's something environmental or
within our lifestyle that's having an
impact on that so again there's many
factors that go into it certainly just
having an aging population our
population a lot of people are starting
to move into older age
groups we also have aftermath of poor
diet a lot of people with diabetes high
blood pressure and these other
conditions that cause Ripple effects
down the
road and then our society has changed
especially in the form of Lifestyle
Beyond Diet also what we do throughout
the day how much time do we spend on
devices up close how much of our society
is focused on education and how much
time do we spend
indoors all of these things are pushing
us to as a as as a societ to have
different changes within the eye and
increase our risk for diseases and
potential vision loss why does it matter
you know I ask that question because I
think for people to spend time listening
to all the education you give out they
first have to really believe that their
eyes matter and I know this sounds like
a bit of a crazy question because we all
can understand that seeing things is
useful but sometimes in life I think we
don't appreciate things until we lose
them and I think in your line of work
you must see that more than ever pun
intended right no you're absolutely
correct and it's it's so frustrating as
an eye care provider of how many
patients or how many people just come in
because they finally notice something's
wrong and usually by the time
something's wrong they notice it it's
already too late and so one of the best
things I can recommend for anybody is to
whether you think you have a problem
with your vision because a lot of people
are like I see great I see fine I don't
need to see an eye doctor it's like no
you absolutely need to there's so many
different not only just problems with
your eyesight that we can catch but
there's so many there's over 270
different conditions systemic and vision
conditions that an eye doctor can
diagnose from Just One of the simplest
non-invasive medical evaluations and
that's just getting an eye exam every
year give me some examples of of how
conditions you've spotted by doing an
eye exam so patients who don't know
their diabetic will catch Diabetes by
looking inside the eye because diabetes
will cause damage to the blood vessels
and we can see bleeding happening in the
retinal tissue we can see high blood
pressure high cholesterol I've had
patients where I've caught that they've
technically had little strokes already
inside because it's looking inside the
eye the eye itself can have a stroke we
can see cholesterol plaques stuck in the
arteries within the
eye autoimmune conditions we'll catch
those from doing an eye
exam unfortunately things like brain
tumors and conditions like multiple
sclerosis we'll catch
those I've I had a one one story I'll
share I have one patient who was she was
young she was 20 years old college
student she came in for just getting new
glasses contact lenses she has to go to
school she has to see well and during
that very routine exam she has no other
problems I'm looking inside the eye and
I can see a hemorrhage a blood spot but
there's different types of hemorrhaging
that occurs in the back of the eye
this specific type of hemorrhage is
called a WTH
spot and typically we only see Roth
spots if somebody has a more serious
condition going on can you show me on
that where you saw it sorry so so we for
people that aren't watching and just
listening on audio we have a model of an
eye here so with the model of the
eyeball during the exam we of course
look through the cornea through the
pupil usually we dilate the pupils if I
was to open up the inside of the eye the
orange part that you see here that's the
retinal tissue and you can see the
little red lines those are blood vessels
the retina is really the eyeball is kind
of beautiful because it has a dual blood
supply so it actually has blood that
comes through the back and supplies the
retina from the back side but then it
has blood vessels that go within the
retina and Supply nutrients within the
retina from the front side so this type
of bleeding spot was occurring just
right here in the back of the eye a
little bit off angle but it was
occurring there and I was like this
should not be
there especially for somebody that was
healthy had no other issues what sort of
age she was 20year old female college
student and usually again we see raw
spots in more serious conditions whether
somebody's extremely diabetic or they
have HIV something is going on so I said
this is not right we need to do blood
work so I ended up referring her um
basically did requested a blood blood
blood panel and she didn't have like a
family doctor so I'm like okay we need
to refer you but she's heading out to
college so I'm like I'm going to give
you my full report I need you to go get
this done and then Co happened so I
didn't hear
anything and so finally a few weeks
later they finally allowed uh doctors to
go back into clinics for emergency care
in case I had an emergency and I called
up that patient I'm like I just wanted
to check on her see hey what's going on
did you have to get that blood work and
she's like you saved my life and I was
like what she's like yeah I a few days
later I started feeling really tired and
not feeling well so I went into the
doctor and I brought your your report
they did blood work they found out I had
they they put her in intensive care unit
for 3 days because they were worried she
was going to bleed
out her platelets were so low that she
could she could have just bled there
from doing the blood work she had an
immuno thrombocytopenic
propura so her immune system because
probably a virus but her immune system
was attacking her
platelets platelets are the thing that
sort of clots the blood right correct
and that ended up manifesting in the eye
so it's it was it was one of the few
cases where I was like wow like
otherwise if she hadn't come in what
what could have happened right so I just
use that as a good demonstration because
there are so many things that we catch
on even a daily weekly basis there's so
many misconceptions around Vision in the
eye I think um one of the misconceptions
I think I found myself living under is
that my vision loss is inevitable really
irrespective of what I do and the minute
you you start to believe that story then
it kind of disempowers you but it takes
away your motivation to do anything
about your vision now is that
true there is changes that occur with
age that will change your eyesight and
vision
that some just fundamental facts that
you don't really
have like Supreme control over it's like
your hair growing gray like it's going
to happen it's kind of accepted yeah
with older age you're going to have gray
hair MH with the eye there's conditions
like that like cataracts age related
cataracts eventually will develop
presbyopia that's the condition where
people are in their 40s and early 50s
they start having a hard time seeing up
close and they have to push things
further back and they start wearing
bifocals or verif
focals so those sort of conditions
inevitably do
happen but there are thankfully a lot of
things in our lifestyle that research is
paying more attention to that can help
prevent hopefully prevent and even slow
down the progression of more devastating
blinding eye diseases
so there are things you can do and be
aware of um and happy to go into that so
Global I health and the statistics um
one of the really sort of shocking stats
I read is that most of us are going to
develop nearsightedness when you go into
sort of 2050 2060 is that is that true
what are the stats around that so A
publication that came out in 2016 in
Opthalmology author of
Holden they looked at the statistics of
myop or
nearsightedness even going further back
we've known that nearsightedness does is
is
progressing and now between around 20
it's estimated that you know right now
about 30% of the world's population is
near sided but by about
2050 we will have about 50% of the
entire world's population being
nearsighted in the US right now uh for
kids aged 5 to 19 it were already about
42% and by 2030 so in just a few years
it's expected in the US will be about
that 50% Mark and then other parts of
the world like East Asia like in Japan
it's closer to 80 to 90% people are
already nearsighted really
mhm how come there's certainly genetics
plays a role as more research has come
out we know that genetics maybe only
plays maybe up to about 30% of the
factor so if your parents are
nearsighted or if somebody's severely
nearsighted like if your mom's severely
nearsighted you are a much higher risk
of developing it but the key other
factors of
Lifestyle falls down to
urbanization really the fact that if you
go outside in a big
city that has streets really close to
each other you're not really in an open
field right you have big but tall
buildings right next to you and then you
go inside and you're inside of a smaller
building a smaller
apartment then there's the fact that we
spend so much emphasis in our society on
education on being up close beings right
kids now are not only push to excel in
education and being introduced to
education earlier and spend more time
studying and learning but parents are
giving their kids digital devices as the
babysitter 2.0 right so kids are staring
at tablets even from a very young
age and then it's the amount of time
we're spending
indoors it's interesting because I don't
even think most people realize that the
way we live our lives the things we
stare at being indoors can change the
eye I think we all kind of operate under
this assumption that our eyes are just
our eyes and we we think of muscles as
being trainable and exercisable you know
I can go to the gym I lift a wait my
muscle changes but my eyes changing is
something that I think is quite
a um an surprising concept to most
people how do we how do we know this so
statistically we've watched and data
collected for you know for many decades
watching people gradually become more
and more nearsighted and there's been in
those theories of why that could happen
the evidence of what changes
physiologically with the eyeball
is that the eye as you grow and go
through adolescence and your body's
growing the eyeball actually
grows backward toward the brain into the
orbit eye socket a little bit and it
doesn't need to change much the eye
growing 1 millimeter just 1 millimeter
will change your prescription for
glasses by about three
diopters which is a high amount so if
somebody gets two millim of
change that is already into the what we
classify as severe myopia which carries
a high risk for eye diseases like
glaucoma cataracts having a retinal
detachment where the retina in the back
of the eye peels off the back of the
globe and then what's called myopic
maculopathy which is a form of kind of
macular degeneration that typically
occurs with later
age and that's and that 1 millimeter or
2 millimeter growth is linked to
Lifestyle the vast majority of
it how much screen time how much being
indoors how much reading books up close
is okay like what is there like a
recommended daily allowance so there are
some recommendations put forth by like
the American Academy of
Pediatrics and it depends a little bit
on age especially for young kids I think
for the first few years of life they
don't recommend kids look at screens at
all and then why why because again
there's research showing that not just
for eye development but also
neurological
development and I I'm not a specialist
on that form of pediatric brain
development so I can't really opine on
that but we do there are recommendations
for it and I encourage anybody who's
listening if you have a young child if
you're thinking about having a child
definitely look into those
recommendations because it has impact
acts on your child's development and
growth the as far as like adults like
you and I are both in our 30s how much
time is spending on like looking up
close once you're past the age of like
20 25 the rate of myopia development
thankfully slows down that's
nearsightedness nearsightedness correct
yeah that does slow down but about 10%
of the population can still develop a
stronger and stronger
prescription and part of that again is
your education and how much time you're
spending indoors and on near devices the
there have been numerous studies looking
at outdoor time and that spending more
time outside can offset the onset and
progression of near
sidedness most studies are quoting
somewhere around 90 minutes to two hours
a day can kind of offset the all the
near work that children are using so
spending sort of 90 minutes to two hours
a day look outside looking far that's
that's a part of it uh the various
studies do look at you know are they
doing things up close while they're
outside or is it just being outside it's
not fully understood is it sunlight is
it the brightness of light outside is it
the individ specific wavelengths of
sunlight that are somehow communicating
to the back of the eye to grow or not
there's also the thought that the way
the world around us focuses on the
retina when we're outside may send a
different signal to the back of the eye
because one of the areas that they've
done so much
research on in terms of how myopia
progresses has to do with how light is
focusing on different parts of the
retina I do wanted to step back when it
comes to all the spending time outside
it's that again that research is largely
based on surveys and so they aren't 100%
sure how much light outs door time
people are really getting so now uh
they're
utilizing Health trackers and giving it
to kids for those studies so they can
track truly how much light they're
getting when they're stepping outside
versus not so they can have a better
objective data to really understand the
risk of myopia progression based on that
I was wondering if um vitamin D plays a
role at all there that's also theorized
and looked at in some studies uh also
just Athletics and getting more um more
Motion in in a daily activities so there
there's there's many different studies
in those regards but right now even a
study out of Taiwan um they've been
imple
implementing a policy it's like hey you
have to get at least 90 to two hour 90
minutes to two hours
outside every single day and they have
noticed over the last decade there has
been a decrease in childhood myopia
development there's still some debate if
it helps slow down progression because
even a more recent metaanalyses said it
wasn't statistically significant for the
progression of myopia but it does delay
onset of myopia can you reverse
myopia no okay so if if if I'm if I
become nearsighted because of my
lifestyle or some other reason I can't
then just spend loads of time outside
and reverse it and start gazing off into
the distance Etc so there's the
understanding of what true myopia is and
again that has to do with the elongation
of the
eyeball so if you were to somehow find a
way to truly reverse myopia you would
have to find a way to somehow shift that
part of the eye forward which we have
not been able to do there are I noce
being in the world of social media there
are people who will claim that they've
done this using various things usually
these people who are claiming this are
selling something that is not based on
science that is and and doing a research
study to prove that is would be very
easy to do and it just it hasn't it
doesn't
show most people if they are doing
spending more time outside or they are
doing eye exercises of any form to try
and reverse their
nearsightedness what's likely what
they're going through is that they have
something called
pseudomyopia which is where they've
overused their eye muscles so much that
they're more or less having a spasm and
they've their muscle is making them
think that they are nears side inness
but then finally going outside spending
more time outside stop staring at their
phone so much they learn to relax their
eye muscles and all of a sudden now they
can see better again well this is you
know in part one of my con my personal
concerns because sometimes very rare
occasions I'll spend you know maybe 9 10
12 hours in this studio and you know I'm
doing research on the guest before the
guest arrives and then we're sitting at
this sort of distance and I'm very
intently focused and it's a dark room
Etc and then when I walk outside it's
like I can't see a bloody number plate
and I think I'm losing my vision but
from what you're saying there it sounds
like I'm going through a bit of pseudo
myopia you could be you're uh of course
I I haven't done an eye exam on you I
don't know where you're at can I ask
when was the last time you had your eyes
check oh no comment um it was a long
time ago and the reason for that is
again because I just I always assume my
eyes were were fine so it would have
been gosh that's such a good question
maybe seven years ago or something so
it's it's tough to say um you know there
is possibility that maybe there's a
little bit of nearsightedness there it
could be that you've used your eye
muscles so much indoors that you're just
you're used to lifting it think of it
like lifting a 5B weight right you've
held it there all day long and most
people can eventually if you hold it
there long enough you can have some eye
strain and people will feel that at the
end of the day but then you step outside
and you're just used to holding it 5
pound weight at Arms level so you have
to learn to hey I can relax this and put
it back down MH so that is a component
of the internal eye muscle called the
sary body which
unfortunately is not the same type of
muscle as your skeletal muscle and so
even with I exercises you can't
strengthen that muscle so eye exercises
don't work they eye exercises in the
form of what's called vision therapy or
orthoptics can work but they're not
building the muscle they are improving
the really the coordination of your
brain communicating that information to
those muscles to work in coordination
okay and so there's a some certain
binocular Vision disorders like people
who have convergence and sufficiency
they can't move their eyes to bring them
forward to keep a page in front of them
single or some people have loss of their
accommodative ability their ability to
change Focus to keep something up close
clear those type of binocular vision
issues can be trained again through the
training of the communication between
the brain and those muscles should I be
looking for Clues as to what the future
of my vision is going to be like from my
parents because my parents are they they
hold everything at like one meter length
from their face and I when I was younger
used to take the piss out of them
thinking like that's so ridiculous and I
would show them that I could read from
like 1 cimeter away and they're reading
it arms length but I think they're going
to have the last laugh when when I get
to 50 60 years old sure because of
genetics or whatever so again uh even
without genetics just the way the eye
ages the lens inside of your eye will
change which is so if I open up the eye
model
here let me try not to spill everything
from the inside of the
eye in the front portion of the eye you
have the cornea which is the is that the
very front piece it's the Clear Window
to the eye okay behind it of course you
have the iris the colored part of the
eye so brown eyes blue eyes behind that
you have a
lens it's called the crystallin lens and
this has got a couple different pieces
also to the side but this crystallin
lens is actually about the size of an
M&M I put these together it's it's kind
of that shape
M when you're born this lens is clear
and thin and so the muscle inside the
eye actually pulls on this lens to
change its shape and that's what helps
you as a little kid see all the way
toward the front of your
nose as you get older this lens gains an
extra layer basically every year of your
life and so so as you get older if you
ever look up on images online you can
actually see Rings or these little lines
and it's like looking at the rings of a
tree so you can basically count those
and be like look how old this person is
so by the time everybody's about in
their early
40s there's algorithms that predict this
with high accuracy and in school I had
memorized them I've I I don't really
need to use them as much anymore so I
haven't haven't thought about it for a
while but these
as this lens gets thicker it basically
gets thicker every year it gets to a
point where the lens starts to the
crystals within that lens start to
change shape they become more
crystallized rigid and so even though
the muscle inside the eye still pulling
on this lens it's like pulling on a hard
stiff marble it doesn't want to change
shape anymore and so that's why people
can gradually like I can't quite keep
things as clear anymore and so it's
gradually getting worse and worse oh
okay
eventually once you get closer to the
ages of 50 60 70
80 this lens continues to get thicker
harder but then the crystal start to
change color they go from being clear to
being more of a faint yellow color to a
darker yellow whitish
color and that's what we call a cataract
and so people lose vision because that
cataract is so such a dense color that
light is not filtering it's not passing
through to getting to the retina in the
back of the eye anymore so what' you do
cut it out so there is thankfully
cataract surgery is an amazing surgery I
think it's probably one of the more
fascinating surgeries that's out there
they what what modern cataract surgery
does they either use a laser or they
physically have to open up parts of the
eye but they use a procedure called f
ification it's basically using
ultrasound to shatter the lens into
dust and then they have a small vacuum
tube that sucks up all the particles out
of the eye but then a new plastic lens
is inserted into the eye into that place
and that new plastic lens can be made to
account for any glasses prescription
that you need okay and what's
fascinating for you and I is that so
this form of cataract surgeries been
evolving and getting better and better
over Generations but the new lens
implants that they've been
engineering are just outstanding even
right now because now they can make
multifocal lenses they can have lenses
that change shape based on how you're
using your eyes and then it's basically
not needing bifocals not needing glasses
as much in some cases if at all and so I
keep on thinking like wow where this
technology is right now where is it
going to be in 30 40 years years when
you and I are getting to that point
where we might need to think about
it who knows what we're going to have I
reckon we'll have like cameras I hope
so are people working on that kind of
thing I bet someone's working on some
kind of camera electric eyeball you know
I did hear of some research maybe about
five six years ago of somebody talking
about it but um since then I think
things have kind of gone quiet they are
probably in the last year one of the the
last last few years there's been
interest and Research into making like
augmented reality contact lenses that
are quite fascinating and then there is
the kind of one of the newest things is
the first whole eye transplant that was
one of the kind of the coolest things
that have come up recently there was an
eye
transplant so a gentleman was injured in
the he was a US military but something
happened on the job electrical damage to
his face his eyee he ended up having
partial face transplant and then a whole
eye
transplant and at this time it is the
first one ever done the eye is so unique
and so
complex that when they finally did this
transplant it's it's sort of shaken the
I care role a little
bit the they just I just read like a
one-year a publication in jamama that
was basically summarizing what it's been
like after this last year and it's
amazing amazing because the eye did
connect to the optic nerve because the
eye again is so complex so they had to
not only connect muscles to the eyeball
but they had to connect the optic nerve
to the from the donor tissue to the
host and keeping that the right amount
of blood supply having it so it didn't
reject is is a really tough feat and
what they have now they find that the
last this last paper I just read that
the eye is still doing well it's still
got blood flow it's making aqueous humor
the kind of the clear blood within the
eye and through functional MRIs and
electroretinograms that we can do in the
clinic they have been able to show that
there is electrical activity going to
the patient's brain unfortunately he
does not have any eyesight or he cannot
detect light with it but I think just
this is the first step of showing like
wow we actually can
try this we can get it so it actually is
safe so it's it's pretty fascinating God
it's only going to be a matter of time
isn't it um you said there that the eye
is complex I was reading some stats
around the eye that blew my mind the eye
contains over two million working parts
and is considered the second most
complex organ in the body I guess this
the brain is the first in the eyeball is
really an extension of the brain right
the the retina in the back of the eye
communicates directly through the optic
nerve to many parts of the brain your
eyes are capable of processing 36,000
pieces of information an hour your eyes
will process 24 million images
throughout your lifetime contributing to
85% of your total knowledge and there's
a comment saying that the eye is a
window to your soul showing how the eyes
are so expressive that they can reveal a
lot about a person's inner state which
we talked about a second ago it's just
crazy that that particular stat around
um 85% of my total knowledge will
basically come from my ey
when you say it I kind of understand it
because okay I'm reading I'm seeing I'm
you know I'm learning through my
eyeballs but it is um it is cause for
protecting our eyes and the things you
described there cataracts and these
other sort of eye conditions cataracts
in particular is that something that I
can Stave off
by making better choices with my life so
people who
do smoke people who drink more uh that
increases their oxid oxidation so the
cataract
formation mostly occurs due to oxidative
stress within the eye in fact the most
vitamin C in the body is within the eye
and it bathes it's in a solution that
bathes around that lens and helps
prevented from
oxidizing so best things is try not to
smoke drinking not to do too much the
sunlight does play a role in aging of
the lens
and so there's epidemological studies on
age related eye diseases that have found
that people who spend more time Outdoors
without sunlight protection without wide
brim hats without sunglasses they are
more likely to develop conditions like
cataracts there is a specific there's
different types of cataracts there's one
specific type of cataract called a
cortical cataract that kind of looks
like bicycle spokes if you're do if you
looking in the eye like I do in the exam
room you can see these bicycle Spokes
and those have been found to be more
related to UV light exposure
and
then as far as taking supplements
vitamins those sort of things because
things like vitamin C are a water
soluble
vitamin once you have enough vitamin C
in your body you just urinate out
everything else so there have been
studies on people who are malnourished
and don't get enough vitamin C that
giving them vitamin C can help slow or
Pro delay the onset of cataracts
but if you already are getting proper
nutrition
taking additional vitamin C's probably
not going
to delay your onset of cataracts
specifically I learned something from
you actually from your Instagram um
which I think is really going to do me a
lot of favors because I'm someone that
spends a lot of time on my phone admitt
and you alerted me to the fact that
there's actually a feature in the iPhone
which will help me Stave off my myopia
potentially perhaps uh so thankfully
again the iare Community is not the only
people who are aware of these issues
with using devices up close MH but
thankfully whether it be apple
specifically with their iPhone but also
this the other phone manufacturers
people who are making these devices now
have software that tracks hey you're
holding this really close to your face
we want you to push it further back so
thankfully they do have those sort of
notifications that people can turn on
I'll admit that I turned mine on for a
while and I eventually got so annoyed
with it I wanted to push it further back
uh so I I kept it on for a while I
eventually took it off um but maybe I'll
have to put it back on again just be a
good just to serve a good example so
there's it was a feature released in
2023 and it essentially sends you a
notification whenever your phone is is
it what 12 in or something I don't
remember exactly how close it is but we
do know that on average people hold
their phones and devices around 8 in
away from their face so pretty close
and it's important to consider moving
things further back and part of that can
be because certainly eye strain
relationships possibly myopia and then
even blue light I know people are get
really concerned and um interested
around the blue light World especially
since Co that really blew up at that
time but just moving your phone back
twice as far will decrease your blue
light exposure by 20 like a full
75% so
if if you're worried about how blue
light's affecting you it's like just
move your phone back a few inches and
that's automatically going to decrease
your blue light exposure from that
device I I don't think most people know
that this feature even exists because I
don't think Apple really ever announced
it or did a marketing campaign around it
but in the setting section of your phone
and your iPad Etc it's under screen time
um and under screen time there's a
button called screen distance and it
says to reduce eye strain and risk of
myopia in children screen distance will
alert you to hold an iPhone or iPad with
face ID at a recommended distance um and
in the small print it says screen
distance works by measuring the distance
between the screen and your eyes the
camera is not capturing images or your
face and the data collected remains on
the device so if I click continue it
then says this is how screen distance
Works um screen distance encourages you
to move your iPhone and iPad further
away to support your vision health um
the next section says V Vision distance
or viewing distance iPhone or iPad
should be held at a suggested of 30 cm
from your eyes mhm
um interesting those are recommendations
but how many people actually follow that
it's no one yeah it's tough I mean
you'll see people do that and it just
gradually over time gets closer and
closer and kids probably are even worse
because they automatically have smaller
arms right but then they just they just
bring it right up close right they want
that phone screen to take up all of
their their visual field and so it is I
think it's a a good habit I think it's
something tell me have you when have you
turned it on has it something that
you've utilized I turned it on when I
was in preparation for you coming here
today so I I didn't know it existed
until I was researching you and so I've
had it on for about a day frankly I
haven't actually got the notification
yet but okay um it's not been on long
enough I don't think for me to have an
opinion on it just yet but you said it
was annoying you so it's definitely
going to annoy me if it annoyed you so
my my challenge was
that in the evenings I wear contacts
most of the time and I take my contact
lenses out in the evening and I go back
to glasses and sometimes I'll lay I'll
like lay down and I'll take my glasses
off because I'm so nearsighted I have to
see my I want to see the screen but I
have to hold the screen just a few
centimeters in front of my face because
I'm that
nearsighted and then it would just give
me that warning the whole time and it
delays it has like a few seconds of
delay once I pull it back before it
actually shows me the screen again so I
was doing it so much I'm like I know
that I should pull the screen away and I
should just take a break but it was it
was delaying my productivity yeah so
that that's why but again to set a good
example I'll probably have to turn it
back on and see how it goes and if you
have kids you can always you know
they're not probably doing much that's
productive you can always turn it on
their devices I guess yeah I think so I
think it's also a good habit to um lead
by example for kids and try to be aware
of how much time you're spending on your
phone in front of your kids because your
kids are going to see that and and
they're going to probably mimic that
same behavior I want to talk to you
about bags under my eyes um subject that
I know a lot of people are interested in
and there's a lot of misconceptions
around how we get bags under our eyes I
think most people think bags under their
eyes are because they're tired or
something um and is there a difference
between having bags under my eyes and
having sort of dark circles under my
eyes so when it comes to having dark
circles under eye bags dark circles is
something that people are definitely
concerned about it's a huge topic online
I see all the time people ask about it
in the eye clinic having dark circles
under the eyes is technically different
than having under eye bags but if you
have under eye bags it'll make the
appearance of dark circles worse okay so
dark circles in the clinic we think
first what's somebody's skin
pigmentation like is the dark circle
just because they have more pigmentation
and if you're somebody who spends a lot
of time in the sunlight you are more
likely to develop darker skin complexion
around the eyelids the eyelids are some
of the thinnest most delicate tissue of
skin on your body and in fact a lot of
uh people who don't know this but uh
under having skin cancer on your lower
eyelid is actually pretty high so it's
good to be wearing either a wide brim
hat or sunglasses to protect the eyes
from sunlight
damage the other kind of components is
that if you have vascular changes so
myself I have a really pale complexion
if I have bad allergies that can cause
the blood vessels around my eyelids to
dilate and so you'll see that color of
just the blood vessels coming through
the skin a lot easier and then there's
orbital shadow effects because some
people's orbits they have more prominent
brow it may cost kind of cast a shadow
onto the lower eyelid and that's where
having under eye bags can also make the
eyelids seem like they're uh have kind
of a dark circles because the eyelids
are puffy and you can have puffiness of
the eyelids for multiple reasons
allergies are a big one salt content of
the cheer film and even in your body can
make some of those changes I know for
myself if I have a cheat day and I eat a
bunch of greasy delicious pizza the next
morning I'll probably be I can feel that
my skin and my face is maybe a little
bit more
puffy uh thankfully that goes away
within a few hours but that's why a lot
of times even just doing cold compresses
right you see people put cucumbers on
their eyes a lot of that has more have
to do with just the cooling temperature
doing a cold compress for 10 at Max 15
minutes can bring some of that puffiness
down and that can at least help help
improve the appearance so if I have a
really salty diet the night before I'm
there's a greater probability I'll wake
up with bags under my eyes possibly okay
I've tried to research this to find any
real Publications to to see if it's
really there and I couldn't find
anything but I know from just my own
anecdotal experience that if I eat a
really high salt diet um and I've done
over the last eight years I've really
done a better job I know you have too of
like thinking about my diet how that
affects me how my body feels after I eat
something and so I've noticed if I if I
have a cheat day that sort of thing can
happen and where does this what's the
sort of physiological rationale for salt
playing a role so your tear film for
examp example um your tear like I know
some people will say hey if I have a
watch a sad movie and I cry at night
time the next morning my eyes are super
puffy so your tears have salt in them
and because if you ever cried and tasted
your tears they taste salty right so the
challenge is that when you have salt
it'll draw fluid into the
tissues and so if people cry the night
before the salt remaining in the tears
basically get into the tear ducts and
sit on the surface of the eye and the
eyelids and then that can draw fluid
into those tissues does hydration play a
role you that's also something that's
been looked at in research is not really
conclusive I think hydration is still
something we need to I do encourage
people to at least be aware of their
hydration U for dry eye there is some
research that indicates that people who
are drink more water tend to have less
severe symptoms of dry eye when I see
someone with bags into their eyes I used
to think well I still kind of do think
that it just means that they haven't
slept that again I recently did uh a
live stream or I did research first and
try to look into this and they have
looked at quality of sleep time of sleep
and both the subjective and objective
appearance of dark circles under the
eyes and they find that it is if you
have not been getting good sleep
objectively your under eye dark circles
do not change but your subjective
appearance of your own image will go
down ah okay so you're both they find
that for both sleep and stress so you
believe that you've got bigger sort of
dark circles or patches under your eyes
but objectively in reality you haven't
yeah because they can measure the type
of light being reflected off the surface
of your skin so they can see how much
pigment and what type of light is is
being reflected and so they've been able
to find oh that it's purely just your
subjective opinion of your own
self-image seems worse when you're tired
what about stress cuz I'm thinking about
people that I've seen that have like big
bags under their eyes and like you know
their eyes kind of look dark I always
assume it's their stress and they
haven't been sleeping but you're say
saying that that's not accurate
necessarily so at least in the the few
studies that I've been able to read that
were published in the last five years
don't seem to find that conclusive there
are other physiological changes that
happen when people don't sleep or stress
right cortisol releases inflammation in
the body will change hormones can change
so they may all play a role there um but
right now it seems to have a
less effect on the true pigmentation of
the
eyelids okay and the the cucumber and
the cold compress and all that kind of
stuff does that stuff work in changing
the appearance of dark circles and bags
and Dem eyes because when I filmed
Dragon's Den TV show in the UK I
sometime it's weird cuz like sometimes
when I'm
underslept I come into the studio and
the makeup artist she won't say anything
to me but she'll just put the Cucumber
on and I know what she's saying she's
saying you look like but but she
doesn't say it so and it's always when I
haven't slept so I put two and two
together and thought okay well she knows
that my eyes don't look great today um
but is is it actually doing anything the
cucumber and the the coolness effect I
believe is going to be causing con
restriction of blood vessels it's going
to be helping the tissue come down and
swelling just like if you bang your knee
or elbow really hard on something it
swells there's a little bit inflammation
and so putting cool cold down there can
help momentarily but I wouldn't do it
longer than 15 minutes the the reason
why is because if you do it longer than
15 minutes your blood vessels that can
go the opposite way and cause more
inflammation the there's other things
like eye creams there's a plethora of
different eye creams on the market some
of those do work to help
constriction some of those are to help
true truly remove
pigmentation and a lot of those
products can have effect but it takes
months to truly remove the pigment so
you're talking you're using that two
three times a day for like 14 15 weeks
but uh outside of that if somebody's
tried all those other avenues talked
with their dermatologist or or an eye
care pro provider of any kind and things
still aren't getting better there are
some surgical procedures that can be
done to help people with the appearance
of under eye bags and some dark circles
what do those surgeries do they either
use various forms of light or light
therapies to help remove pigmentation
you have to be careful around the eyes
when it comes to those sort of therapies
but they do exist and then there's
fillers like they'll do hyaluronic acid
fillers to change the shadowing effects
around the eye and then there's forms of
what are called a blop plasty which are
true eyelid surgeries and for that you
would want to see an opthalmologist who
specializes in those type of therapies
or or those type of surgeries so if I
never want to get dark circles bags into
bags into my again what is the natural
easy solution I do still encourage good
sleep eating healthy uh staying hydrated
I think all of those things are good
habits to have because we know they
affect the body in so many other ways if
somebody is truly struggling with it
then you can look at those various
creams but I definitely encourage people
talk to a medical provider or whether a
dermatologist or an eye care provider
who specializes in that area what about
red light therapy so red light there's
so much in red light and this is I'm
glad you brought that up because this is
something I've been diving kind of head
first into into the research for many
things in the eyes with the bag
specifically I'll say that there is some
newer Publications showing that red
light
therapy can help with
depigmentation around the eyelids and
giving the eyelids more of a youthful
appearance I do wave caution though
because there's a lot
of products that are
online
that that offer red light therapy for
various reasons but this they're not
really standardized very well
and so there are also Publications
showing people who've had damage to the
eyes because they've used these various
forms of red light therapies devices
they bought
online because the manua what the
manufacturer States isn't actually
what's being measured when they do it in
the research and find out hey what type
of wavelength is this how much energy is
being produced by the device because
it's not the specific wavelength the
wavelength is important but the amount
of energy in the red light
also super important and if you have too
much energy you can go through the
eyelid and go into the eye and cause
damage and so I think it's really
important this is still a very early
area of research when it comes to the
eye and so I think I I just urge caution
to make sure whoever's listening if
you're thinking about red light therapy
you're thinking about getting a red
light device specifically for ey care
definitely talk to a specialist who
works in that area okay okay the um but
red
light have you have you heard much about
red light in different areas I've heard
a lot about it I don't know a huge
amount about it and I have two red light
panels at home which were given to me as
a gift um my my partner has when I have
one we basically got each other the same
Christmas present one year but we we did
ask ourselves we sat in front of it one
day and said what does this like what
does this do in terms of our health and
are we allowed to stare at it the
devices you come that you got do they
come with go
no okay so
that that is sort of the concern I have
is again what energy is really not just
what wavelengths of light is it emitting
but what's the energy and also how far
away from the device are you sitting
what's the
recommendations and specifically with
the I there is evidence that Redlight
therapy can help with dry eyes that red
light therapy can help with macular
degeneration
which is is so age related macular
degeneration is one of the leading
causes of blindness for older age adults
so 50 plus 50 plus in fact if you're
over the age of 40 and somebody's
legally blind 50% of them it's due to
macular
degeneration and so probably some of the
best research in red light in the eyes
is on macular
degeneration uh in fact there is it's C
it's currently approved and being used
in Europe
it's not approved in the US just yet but
it is going through FDA trials but that
is a form of red light therapy it it
doesn't just use red light it uses some
near infrared light and a little bit of
kind of a yellow light but they shine
that in the eye in intervals and they do
it for a few weeks and then a few months
you do it again and for macular
generation they've been able to show
that not only can the protein that
builds up in the back of the eye in that
condition
diminish but they can slow down and slow
down the progression of macular
generation and for some people even
restore eyesight they can actually help
people see better using red light
therapy using that form of red light
therapy so again very early research
right now the challenge with all these
at home devices whether it be for dry
eye whether it be for Mac
generation there's again concern about
the power density and about the
potential change in temperature within
the eye because that could cause damage
there's also red light being utilized
and investigated in Asia and in
Australia for myopia for children and so
it's it's something that is really
fascinating and I am looking forward to
as more information comes out but it's I
I personally from digging into it and
trying to understand it it does make me
concerned of
how I think there's just not as good a
standardization or understanding of
really how it works and which devices
are safe and which ones are more
medically something that you should see
a medical provider for I read in the
nature publication that a 2022 study
with 20 participants receiving red light
therapy twice a week for three weeks
found that they had improved tier
reduction tier reduction and other dry
eyye symptoms compared to the place
placebo group tear reduction what does
that mean so dry eye again is an area
where red light therapy is being
utilized in right now the
there's several studies on red light on
its benefits for dry eye but the two
areas where it's believed to help the
most is in helping you produce more of
your own natural tears because the red
light can shut down inflammation um
within the tissues and help you produce
uh basically it helps the cell re more
energized the mitochondria within the
cell can be activated by forms of red
light and nitric oxide is also produced
and then you have higher amounts of
antioxidants and so these cellular
components in mice and then now in
humans they're finding that tiar
production can be improved which helps
with dry eyes which helps with dry eyes
but then also the red light can help
with the myomi glands in the eyelids
your eyelids have about 25 to 30 glands
both the bottom and the top part of the
eyelid can you show me on that the uh so
it's actually on in the eyelids but the
eye lids would
be oh in front they're in front yeah so
so my top eyelids have about 30 my Boman
glands in them and my bottom eyelid has
like 25 to 30 and every time you blink
these glands have to release a little
bit of oil that prevents your tear
filing from
evaporating and so there's a lot of
implications that go into this but what
happens is as we get older age is a big
factor but then you also have more we
can talk about with device use and the
fact that when we're stering at devices
we don't blink as often and we don't
blink as completely when we're sterring
at a device and so for that along with
diet and other inflammatory things the
glands stop producing oil as well they
become inflamed the oils go from being a
clear liquid to being a thick wax they
become yellow they become cloudy and
they stop releasing oils into your tier
film and so with red light therapy along
with other therapies but red light has
been found to help with getting those
oils to produce at least a little bit
better I think the research on red light
in my Bing gland dysfunction is still in
its infancy but we have a different form
of therapy called IPL or intense pulse
light which has been even FDA approved
for my boming gland dysfunction in
treating dry ey is there any research
being done on red light and myopia a red
light and shortsightedness I if I look
at those red light panels I have at home
is that going to help with my
Progressive
shortsightedness so there is research
going into red light in myopia it's
being done in
children when it comes to the device you
have at home I have no idea what
wavelength that is I have no idea what
power that is the devices that are being
researched and used in research are
usually a atome desk mounted device yeah
that kids will stare into for about 3
minutes twice a day morning and then
night and they are showing in in those
Publications that they're able to slow
down the rate of progression of myopia
and even for kids who haven't developed
myop myopia they're able to prevent them
from developing myopia which is really
fascinating there have been at least
there is at least one study that looked
at those devices and there is there is
some concern that perhaps the power
density is too high and could be at risk
of causing damage to Children's eyes so
again it's still it's still something
heavily in research and I wouldn't
recommend people go and purposely stare
into a red light unless their doctor is
prescribing it for something and just
because I'm an idiot um the red light is
basically stimulating the mitochondria
in the cell which is kind of like the
engine in the cell and that's making it
produce more of the good stuff
specifically ATP uh adenosine
triphosphate the which the cell uses for
energy what about gazing at the sun
because I've been told so many things
when I was younger it was like never
look at the Sun and then I got older and
people are like no like stare at the Sun
and now I don't know what true yeah
don't stare at the sun even for like a
second
don't the so the challenge is sunlight
is good for the eyes especially early on
in the day and of course toward the end
of the day just so that you're getting
the signals to your brain to hey U the
sun is coming up the Sun is going down
way to kind of influence your melatonin
production the staring directly into the
sun though the sun is so powerful it can
very quickly burn holes inside your
retina and I have a patient right now
who she you know she's comes in her
vision is not getting to 2020 we look
inside the eye and she has burn holes a
burned hole in her retina that is we
diagnose as solar
retinopathy and so and I'm like have you
been staring at the sun she's like yeah
I've been sungazing since I was little
uh I was in Florida recently and I
stared at the Sun and and I was doing
this for how many minutes
and now she has permanent little blind
spots where she cannot see 2020 anymore
where in there is that the colored part
of the eye no so the the colored part is
the iris but the light going through the
eye is magnified so strongly by the
cornea and the lens inside the eye that
ends up focusing on the part of the eye
called the FIA or the macula which is at
the back of the it's in the back part of
the eye imagine if we're going to play
darts we're going to go to the pub we're
going to throw darts the center Bullseye
of the eye called the
macula that part is your reason you see
so sharply is the reason that it's the
part of the eye that you're using when
you're reading words when you're
studying when you're looking at your
friends and family in the face you're
using that Bullseye in the back of the
eye so when someone looks at the sun
they're putting all of that light energy
focused right in that area and in just a
few seconds you can overwhelm that
tissue causing chemical damage to the r
because people this phrase Su gazing mhm
is this like a spiritual thing like I I
think I was in Bali and people like no
you can you can sungaze you should
sungaze because it's good for you
sungazing what is this term that is
usually in some sort of either religious
or spiritual practice people will gaze
toward the
sun usually from my understanding it's
people doing it in the early morning or
late afternoon when the sun is largely
going down the Horizon mhm and because
the light is indirectly being bent
perhaps it's not giving as much energy
to cause thermochemical damage to the
back of the eye but the there is still a
high risk and so uh it's always best to
not stare directly into the Sun or you
know try to look off center from it and
especially during the high UV times of
the day you know 10 to 400 p.m. usually
uh it's good to be wearing UV light
protection not just because UV can
penetrate into the eye but because UV
light damages the skin of the eyelid it
can cause changes to the front surface
of the eye people can get sunburn on the
surface of the eye okay that's good to
know I'm not going to look at the sun I
was being torn because I got a friend
who uh who told me that sun gazing is
good for you and you should do it and
stuff but I'll take your word for it you
you mentioned blue light a second ago
which is the light that comes off our
devices um is that harmful for my eyes
there's blue light that comes from the
sun yeah really high
energy that could potentially cause
aging changes inside the eye the blue
light that comes from your digital
screens does not have enough power and
has consistently shown in research to
not increase the risk of Aging eye
diseases it just impacts my sleep
potentially impacts your sleep there's
also some claims that blue light can
affect your eye strain but again
research on Blue Light glasses on us
devices shows that blue light does not
impact IE strain a lot of people will
claim that they will I have a lot of
patients who come in and anecdotally
like oh my eyes feel so much better from
getting the blue light glasses
and that could just be placebo
effect it could potentially be the fact
that a lot of blue light glasses will
have anti-glare or glare-free protection
put on to it and the anti-glare is
probably improving their focus and
they're not having as much glare issues
when considering at the
device but right now there's still just
no concrete evidence showing that blue
light is contributing to IE strain but
then the Sleep Cycle we do know that
blue light can influence your sleep what
kind of gadgets do you have I I don't
know why but I assume as someone who is
an an eye doctor you must have loads of
gadgets around your house that you use
to because you know all of the
information about eyes and vision and
stuff is that am I wrong I mean I I've
yeah we're I have multiple computer
screens open I have my phone screen open
all day uh I the other day I was texting
a friend I'm like I've got two laptops
open at a coffee shop you know I'm like
I'm doubling down on the blue light here
uh
so there's a lot going on there but yeah
or practices is are there any practices
that you've been disciplined with
because you're aware of the impacts it
will have on your eye specifically on
Blue Light No all of it just your
overall Eye Health so the biggest things
for myself is Diet okay let's talk about
diet then sure what do I need to know in
terms of what I'm eating and drinking to
make sure that my eye Health stays
optimal so they've been looking at
lifestyle factors on Aging eye diseases
for for Gen for for a long time many
decades the biggest one thing when it
comes to diet and they even have more
recent Publications um a mentor of mine
Julie potit she's a past present pres of
the ocular wellness and nutrition
Society who I'm who which I'm a member
of she even brought my attention to a
publication just this year from the
American Journal of nutrition they
looked at the original publication of
aeds the age related eye disease study
that has large cohort of people like
4,000 people they watched over nine
years tracking their diet tracking uh
their eye health and how things were
changing and they find that just eating
a Mediterranean diet green leafy
vegetables oily fish reduces your risk
of developing conditions like macular
degeneration specifically slowing down
the pro the progression of that
condition in that specific study this
publication that just came out they
showed that just having 2.7 servings of
green leafy vegetables in a week not a
day but just even a week right we're
supposed to have more than more than
that in a day but just 2.7 servings or
more can slow down your risk of
progression of that condition macular
degeneration by
25% from going from early to more of an
advanced stage Immaculate degeneration
leads to blindness it can yeah
especially as we get older because that
condition and we can go into it but that
condition has a lot to do with your
inflammation it has to do with
metabolism and oxidative stress that
occur within the
eye but green leafy vegetables at least
2.7 servings a week that's that specific
study they find that oily fish eating
two servings of oily fish a week slowed
it down by 21% and then they found a
synergistic effect for people who ate
both it was a 41% reduced risk of
progressing in that disease so and
that's not just the only study they find
that people who eat diets that have more
fruits and vegetables that have oily
fish reduced risk of developing
conditions like macgeneration reduced
risk of things like diabetic
retinopathy and so I try to focus on
eating a good healthy
diet I mean the thing that I heard
growing up was that you need to eat lots
of carrots and then carrots will help
your vision so carrots do you know where
that came from no that's actually a it
was propaganda started in the UK by uh
Great Britain um from what I understand
I'm sure there's like a historian out
there who's just like grumbling at me
but from what I have read and studied is
that I believe it was World War
II that Britain had
was being attacked by the Germans and
they were worried about German Wares
dropping bombs on them especially at
nighttime and they had already
established
radar to detect war planes coming but
they didn't want Germany to know
that so they put out their own
propaganda saying hey our Scouts can
detect German war planes better because
they eat their carrots because carrots
have beta carotene which your body can
convert to vitamin A which is essential
for nighttime vision and retinal Health
oh okay cuz I always also used to hear
that you e if you ate carrots you could
see in the dark yeah so it's a I mean it
is based on some like vitamin A is
essential for photo receptors in the
back of the eye but most people are not
vitamin A deficient by
far and so it's pretty rare that we see
vitamin A deficiency in the in the eye
clinic unless you uh happen to live in a
place that's pretty malnourished you
mentioned oily fish I was on your
YouTube channel and I saw that you did
an experiment where you took omega-3 for
days uh I guess because there's some
kind of implications for vision with
omega-3 omega-3 does play a role in the
eyes for two rays uh that specific video
uh I was really looking at Omega-3s and
its relationship to my own dry eye
symptoms MH because there's a lot of
studies looking at omega-3 and and its
dry eye and the research is still a bit
all over the place most most Eye Care
providers who specializ in dry eye will
say that you know there is a role for
Omega-3s in helping reduce inflammation
that contributes to dry eye because a
lot of dryeee disease has to do with
inflammation and so there is a large
belief that it does work there are some
publications of course that say no it
doesn't it's just the same as Placebo
and so there's still some debate but
Omega-3s also play a huge role in the
retina in the back of the eye the photo
receptors in the back of the eye within
the retina this again this kind of
orange pink tissue in the back that
picks up all the light that you see the
colors that you see it sends those
signals through the optic nerve to the
brain so the retina is essential so the
photo receptors about 50 to 60% of the
fatty acid content of the
photoreceptor is DHA omega-3 h and so
there have been interestingly enough
research showing that diets that have
more oily fish those people are less
likely to develop macular degeneration
and they're less likely to have problems
with diabetic retinopathy if they happen
to be diabetic but then a lot of the
Publications on using
Omega-3s supplements have not seen the
same
results when terms of this form of
retinal health and
there is some insight they're thinking
they've kind of figured this out and
this is still very early research but so
there is a
transporter called the
mfsd2a this
transporter helps transport specific
forms of DHA
omega-3 into BL through the blood brain
barrier into neural tissue and they're
finding that that same transporter works
for the blood retinal barrier as well
and so newer studies looking mainly at
Alzheimer's disease but they're doing it
on mice and they're formulating a
specific type of DHA called Li lysop
phospholipid
DHA that binds to that transporter and
helps that get into neural tissue and
the current research is showing that
with mice at least I haven't found
anything in humans but at least with
mice that the retinal health is
improving they're having better signals
through the retina as well as less risk
of things like retinopathy so still very
early research but so the omega-3 that
I've got in my cup at home is probably
not going to help but the the new
versions of Omega 3 that they're working
on probably will might and the reason
why the current Omega-3s don't seem to
have that effect on the retina is
because omega-3 fish oils are in the
form of what is called a tri asog
glycerol which your body can convert
into liver to get to neural tissue but
it's not very efficient okay there are
some forms of so if you are eating fish
fish Krill and then like fish eggs do
you like sushi yeah so fish eggs are
often on Sushi um fish
row those types of like salmon I've read
has like up to 1 to 1.7% of these
phospholipid type of DHA so not very
much but Krill can be up to about 30%
fish eggs can be somewhere between 35 up
to like 70% of these phospholipid dhas
and your body is able to either turn
those into triog glycerol which is
similar to the omega-3 fatty acid
supplements or it can turn that into
this lyso phospholipid DHA which your
body can transport into neural tissue at
a at a better bioavailability what did
you discover when you started taking
omega-3 for 90 days as part of that
experiment so that was again looking
more at dry eye yeah and and
specifically I took first I just looked
at hey what's my blood level of Omega-3s
right now just by diet and it was pretty
low at that time it was like 4.7 or
something like that which you want
between 8 and
12% then I started taking I also did
measurements of my dry eye symptoms uh
my dry symptoms I took dry measurements
that we do in the clinic to diagnose
objectively what's going on with the dry
eye the dryness components and then I
took it for 90 days
and then I also tested my my blood again
at the end and I found that after taking
those Omega-3s that specific formula
that it ended up getting to about
99.5% omega-3 it's like a 100 more than
100% increase so it was a dramatic
increase in the omega-3 in my blood and
my dry eye symptoms also improved now
again that's just an N of one you know
I'm just one person uh there's a lot of
dry eye is really complicated too what
is dry eye I don't think I've ever had
dry eye so dry eyye disease is a disease
of the eye I think everybody can have
symptoms of dry eye just if you walk
outside you know it's a windy day maybe
you're sitting around a bonfire or
something smoke hits your eye your eyes
can feel a little dry you blink a few
times but dry eyye disease enters a
whole different state and dryeee disease
occurs when not only is there a there
could be a reduced amount of production
of Tears it could be that your tears
evaporate too quickly that's a lot lot
of people and then what happens is that
there's a little bit of damage on the
surface of the eye because the the tear
film has to stay stable to protect the
tissue
underneath if the tears are gone the
tissue underneath gets exposed to air
and salt content of your tears ends up
going up what we call hyperosmolarity of
the tear that higher salt content
irritates the surface of the cells and
the surface of the eye here on the
cornea it then has little micro
damage which your body tries to
heal inflammatory proteins come out to
try and heal that now again if it's just
a small episode you're walking on the
street wind comes up dry your body heals
it but if it's a chronic condition
you're dealing with dryness all day long
every day for weeks months the
inflammatory proteins never go away and
the inflammatory proteins start
signaling your lacro gland to stop
producing as much tears the inflammation
prevents your eye from healing and then
the inflammation can cause the oil
glands of the eyelids to start to
basically cause more irritation and stop
producing as well is there one food in
particular that is in your view the top
food for Good Eye
Health so green leafy vegetables what
about sweet potatoes sweet potatoes can
certainly have help help you with things
like vitamin A they've got other
nutrients in them I think are really
good um sweet potatoes technically have
beta carotene right same thing as
carrots if you're deficient in vitamin A
your body will convert that beta
carotene to vitam a which is good but uh
mainly in green leafy vegetables you can
not only get things like beta carotene
but you can get lutein and zanthin which
uh are amazing for Eye Health in many
ways not just Eye Health but also brain
health what about sugar what impact does
because you mentioned diabetes earlier I
think if I'm having a sugar in my diet
will that have an impact on my eye
Health it can for patients who don't or
for people who are diabetic or have
elevated blood
sugars when you're have too much sugar
in your blood it can enter into the eye
it can cause the the lens inside the eye
to
swell and so with that swelling you can
see a refractive change your power of
your glasses contact lenses that can
shift and so that can sometimes be a tip
off if you were to see me in the clinic
and I know your prescription suddenly
change like two steps I'm like why is it
making this big of a change it may be a
tip off that hey maybe the blood sugar's
off we have to send you in for like a
diabetic workup do people with diabetes
suffer more with their Vision they can
uh diabetes is it is devastating for the
the health of the eye because with
diabetes when your blood sugar is
elevated it causes damage to the
endothelium of the blood vessels in the
arteries in the back of the eye the
things that the back of those things
there yeah because the the back of the
eye is one of the most highly
vascularized area of your body so
because we can because you have blood
vessels again on the inside of the
retina you have blood vessels on the
backside of the retina and so when
people have damage to those blood
vessels the blood the vessels can start
to Hemorrhage they can start to have
little aneurysms they start to bleed in
the back of the eye and then the
function of the retinal tissue because
the retinal tissue is not getting the
nutrients the oxygen and the nutrients
it needs to stay alive and so then
people's Vision can deteriorate you can
have a swelling in the back of the eye
in the retinal tissue itself we call
macular
edema and ultimately if people
unfortunately are diabetic they don't
know it or they're poorly controlled
they can bleed so much in the back of
the eye that fibrous Scar Tissue starts
to form and it can even pull on the
retina and create a retinal
attachment let's pause for a minute and
talk about today's sponsor whoop what do
you have planned for the next 31 days if
this month is shaping up to look similar
to the last month I want to challenge
you to try something new this October
whoop is encouraging all of its members
to embrace sobriety they want you to
experience all of the mental and
physical changes that come as a result
of abstaining for just 31 days from
drinking and I firmly firmly firmly
believe that this is a good thing I
haven't drunk for more than a year now
now I quit drinking because of whoop I
firmly believe in the power of
information and the agency gives you to
make better informed choices in your
life especially ones around your health
so if you're already part of the whoop
Community keep your eye on the app this
month for the sober October challenge if
you haven't joined yet now is a great
time to join just head to join.
whoop.com CEO to start your free trial
today that is join. whoop.com
CEO now is the time to transform your
life you want going to want to hear this
message from a brand sponsor spoiler
someone's going to have the opportunity
to win
£10,000 you've heard me ask over 300
guess about their purpose you've heard
me ask them what is your why and how
they're building their lives and
businesses around it but how are you
building yours if you're not living
according to your own why you're
probably living according to someone
else's I designed the manifesto method
with Adobe Express to help people
especially business owners reconnect
with their values a lot of people
including myself and most of my life
aren't clear on what are why is but we
all know that it's so important because
it's the North Star it's our Compass
it's our guide through this chaos that
we call Life click the link in the
description to find an introduction to
this method and some easy to use
templates to create your own personal
Manifesto I'll select my favorite to
receive £10,000 and an invite to an
exclusive event with me your why done
your way and I'm excited to see
it every once in a while my eyelid
starts
twitching what is that eyelid myoa is
that what it's called it is that's the
that's the medical definition for it
twitching eye I call it twitching eye
twitching eyelid like the eyelid starts
going what is that so that is your
threshold of your eyelids to Blink is
your level of stress you're like holding
really tight muscles and so they find
and this is historically even in in
textbooks they call it basically The Med
medical student twitching eye because
it's usually people who are stressed out
people who are not sleeping very well
they're fatigued and then people are
drinking way too many stimulants like
drinking caffeine so I have a lot of
patients who come in they're like I'm
having my eyelid twitch and I look over
on the counter and they sure enough have
a have an energy drink with them and I'm
like
okay so that that is largely what it is
some people can
have a true BFRO spasm where the eyelids
close involuntarily
and that's more of an advanced medical
condition so I think if people are
having just a little flutter on their
eyelid it's usually not a concern it's
just get more sleep stop drinking so
much caffeine try to look at your stress
levels and that's a tough thing because
even myself I remember in college I
remember saying the same thing to my
doctor he's like you're just too
stressed and I'm like I'm not stressed
I'm not I'm doing great then I go home
and I start making a list of everything
I'm trying to control in my life I'm
tring trying to control this for grades
I'm trying to do this and Excel in
athletics I'm trying to do this at home
I'm trying to manage this with my
friends and you know halfway through I
look at the list I'm like whoa there is
so much going on in my life no wonder I
actually am stressed I've just I've come
so accustomed to it I haven't I didn't
realize it haven't been that
self-aware glycom now glycom is
something that people over 60 typically
get um from what I've understood m is
that preventable at all or is that just
a consequence of Aging and what is
glycom so glycom is where the nerve the
nerve in the back here that connects the
eyeball to the brain so this thing here
yes so the nerve that all of the retinal
cells converge onto the ganglion cells
which are essentially sending the
information from the eye to the brain
and so glaucoma there's different types
of glaucoma but the nerves die for some
reason so the nerves
at the back here mhm
okay those nerves go send the
information back toward the brain so
that you can see the challenge is that
that nerve if it gets damaged the nerves
die off and when they die you can't get
them back so
glaucoma again there's different types
of them the most common one that people
think about is what's called primary
open angle
glaucoma and this is where pressure
inside of the eye builds up
and if you think of a bike tire if you
fill that full of air and it gets to a
point where it's so filled the weakest
part of the bike tire blows out mhm and
that basically happens with the eye but
the weakest part of the eye is the nerve
in the back so that increased pressure
pushes on the nerve and slowly pinches
it each of the ganglion cells to a point
where it starts to die off that's not
reversible is it unfortunately no when
you when you lose the ganglion cells
they
die we know that pressure plays a role
in it the internal pressure of the eye
and so most treatments right now for
Goma are focused on treating the
pressure but more Publications and
research right now are also going into
how do we better support the health of
the nerve in the back whether that be
through uh blood flow is it better for
us to have some sort of nutrients
getting to the to the optic nerve to
give it more of a robust health and
structure to withstand the pressure MH
so there there's more research going
into it and the other thing that I heard
about when I was I was researching your
work is this term eye floaters I'd never
heard about this before what is an eye
floater so floaters inside the eye are
so many people have these issues and do
do you see them at all do you see little
black specs when you look left and right
do you see little things probably I'm
going to say that maybe sometimes but I
can't recall a time as we get older
floaters do naturally start to to occur
these are the gel inside the eye called
the vitus Vitus
humor so opening up the eye
again this large area that holds the
shape of the eye this is the vitus humor
and it's mostly water collagen and a
little bit of hyaluronic acid but it's
like a
jelly but as we get older this gel
starts to break down and the collagen
begins to Clump and it sits there
suspended in whatever's gel or fluids
left and so when people go outside it's
a bright sunny day they look at the
computer screen it's a back you know
bright backlight they'll see these
little specks floating around and
they'll shift their eyes left and right
and you'll see it continue to drift and
it gets really annoying it's like
looking at a gat or a little bug flying
around and really what's happening is
the light is hitting those collagen
clumps it's casting a shadow on the
retina and you see those floating spots
the
concern is that some people develop
suddenly a whole bunch of
floaters and if you have a whole bunch
of floaters that could be because the
gel which is attached to the retina in
the back of the eye that gel can tug on
the retina and create a small tear or it
can create a full Detachment of the
retina can pull the retina off from the
back of the eye usually though if you
ever have symptoms of a flash of light
like a lightning bolt is going off
somewhere in Your Vision that no one
else saw or you're having a dark shadow
coming down from the top of your top of
your vision or rising up from the floor
or from the side that would be an
indication that perhaps a sudden change
has happened and you should see a doctor
as soon as possible but otherwise the
development of those small little
floating spots those gradually occur
with age and is there a way to treat
them so there are two Surgical
procedures to try to get rid of them
however most
surgeons won't want to do
them because there's always a higher
risk of damage causing damage or other
complications in the eye how many people
are likely to experience these eye
floaters in their lifetime basically
every a decade of life you gain another
10% chance of having these floaters so
by the time most people yeah by the time
you're 80 years old you have an 80%
chance of having these floaters most
people that I see coming in because of a
complaint of floaters are usually in
their 40s 50s I've heard you talk about
pineapple helping to cure floaters so
there there is a a
study that came out several years ago
that looked at using a type of
supplement called
Brolin and that's found in pineapple and
that was a study that looked to see if
people eating pineapple could reduce
their
floaters that study was not the best
study ever done
uh they did it was kind of a a I think
it makes me excited that at least
there's PE there's researchers looking
into hey how is there a way we can get
rid of these floaters because they can
be really annoying if they're really
large they can obstruct people's
Vision a more recent publication from
2021 looked at a different formulation
of different enzymes and vitamin
supplements that include vitamin C Eline
zinc
these can help preventing the
glycation of
collagen and specifically within the
vitus of the eye and they did find after
six months of supplementation that
people's symptoms of floaters reduced
it's only one study and I want to see
more but that right now is probably the
only uh supplement on the market that
has probably the best research behind it
being it was a placebo control trial the
pineapple study was in 2019 in the
Journal of American Science and the
study said that people who had three
slices of pineapple a day had a 75% eye
floater Improvement but you're saying
that that study is not super robust the
medical community the iare community we
don't look at that with having the most
scientific validity we do want to
see more research in that area
anecdotally I've had people certainly
message me on email and on YouTube and
on Instagram saying that it did help
them but it's hard to say if it truly
Placebo or
not it's helpful I get
five one in my left yeah I just one day
I saw it come in what you need to do is
you need to get the pineapple
yeah what is it that you have it conly
come in I remember one day it came in it
really freaked me out didn't know what
it was yeah I thought I was getting some
sort of disease or something I went on
line and it was quite normal yeah but
yeah occasion it would just come and I
can kind of shift it around I can look
at it and like shift it around
look in a c Direction but it's not there
all the time just will suddenly just
drift into
my if somebody even especially for
anybody who's having floaters or seeing
a spot like that I think it's still
really important to have it evaluated
because there is a chance it's not a
huge chance but it's like a 5% that you
could have a small tear or a hole in the
far edge of the eye when the gel
separated mhm and in those cases then if
it's needed they can use a laser to just
zap it and Tack it down so that you
don't develop a retinal detachment
because if you get a retinal detachment
it's an urgent procedure where they need
to repair the retina and get it back
into place because it can otherwise lead
to permanent vision loss you know when
you get something in your eye and it
gets annoying I had it the other day
when I was in bed in in La I was I I had
something in my eye and I could just
feel it and you know you you look in the
mirror and you can't see it and you
someone tries to blow in your eye and
get it out and doesn't work either and
you just feel you can feel it for maybe
like 30 minutes an hour what's the best
thing to do in that situation to get rid
of that feeling in your opinion and is
it like a hallucination because I can't
see anything there so the eyeball it has
some of the most nerve endings on your
body so even just something small piece
of dust gets on your tier film you can
feel that and it can really irritate the
eyes some of the easiest things to do
are using eye drops you know get a get
even just over the counter ey drops
using those to rinse the eye if somebody
gets a chemical in the eye then you
really want to rinse the eye really good
with with just even tap water you want
to get water to flush it out you know if
some you know obviously you're at a a
workplace they have wash stations for
those sort of things so that's going to
be the most important if the eye remains
red irritated the body will produce more
mucus to try and fix the problem and so
a lot of people if you get a little
irritation it just never seems to go
away it's because some there's
inflammation developing on the surface
your body's producing more mucus things
your body can sense that there's more
swelling there so the best thing to do
is rinse it out and goes to the eye
doctor especially if it's not getting
better so how often do you think I
should get my eyes tested yearly every
year you
should I say that because they've had
multidisciplinary um of different Eye
Care Professionals not just ey care but
different medical professionals in
different fields look at the statistics
and again it's the fact that it is one
of the easiest least
invasive medical procedures you can do
to detect the most medical conditions
that can potentially prevent you from
having more serious comorbidities later
in life Dr Joseph what's the most
important thing we didn't talk about
that maybe we should have talked about
today I think probably the one of the
biggest things
that I personally really like to reflect
on we've touched on diet a little bit
but I think diet and
lifestyle paying attention to how much
not only what you eat how much you eat
exercise
sleep hydration focusing on these sort
of things can have a ripple effect on
the eyeball but so many other parts of
the body and that the eyes are an
extension of your brain and what's good
for the eyes is also good for the heart
it's also good for your brain and so I
think we need to be really aware of that
and how important the eyes are for your
learning for your development for your
risk if if you have poor vision your
risk of developing demena and
Alzheimer's in later years is
greater that vision and eyesight is
really important for the development for
children and their
minds and so we we need to be aware of
how all of that is connected and how our
lifestyles on devices all the time and
being indoors so much can also have an
impact so seeing an eye doctor on a
regular basis is really important even
if you feel like your vision is great
and you see fine you don't want to lose
that we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it for
and the question that has been left for
you
is what is your most important early
memory that you've ever had
ever one that does impact me on a
regular
basis is just making
friends when I was a kid I didn't have
many friends and I remember
finely
making friends from sport
and just having people over to play have
sleepovers and finally feeling like I
had companionship of some
kind I think
it kind of proved that I
was that I that I
mattered that I had
value was just or being seen being that
I had a role in this world Beyond just
me being on my
own did your childhood tell you
otherwise I have a memory that I've
shared mainly with my
therapist where I was in trouble I was
grounded to my
bedroom I didn't feel safe leaving my
bedroom because my older brother bullied
me at that
age and I
felt that I did not matter that I was
not wanted that I was only in the
way and I think over the course of my
life that feeling that I needed to
perform
Excel was
the only way for me to get attention to
prove that I had value and worth
and so I think that's driven me
to excel in academics to excel in
extracurriculars it was a very
subconscious thing something I was not
aware
of and I only recently in the last year
have come more to terms with those early
experiences in my life and how they
maybe have driven
me and it's goes through a lot of work
to reflect on those experiences and make
friends with that part of your life and
come to terms that like no I've grown up
I do matter I do bring
value I am worthy of friendship and
love those are tough real things that I
think internally we batter battle and
sometimes don't even realize it
how much of that early
experience inspired you to pursue the
line of work that you do now I know that
you said it pushed you to excel but
specifically focusing on the
eyes somewhat
connected and when I was a kid again I
was lonely I was an indoors kid i'
played a lot of video games watched
movies my brother he was the fisherman
Outdoors
kid when I turned 13 entering into
junior high my mother wanted me to pick
a sport and so I did the manly thing I
want to play football you know American
football I'm gonna tackle people it's
hard to play tackle football with thick
glasses on you had thick glasses mhm I
was a I was a nerdy kid sat inside all
day again I was inside had thck glasses
because that was
myopic I went to the eye doctor got fit
for
contacts and fit being fit in contacts
changed me because suddenly I could play
sports making
friends for the first time in a long
time to having self-confidence because
of
that and having that level of
self-confidence I started to attract the
attention of the opposite sex girls
start paying attention to me and at age
of 13 that was like the most important
thing in the
world and
so continuing to grow up I was always
was fascinated with eyes with contact
lenses and I knew in later High School
when people are like hey what are you
going to do when you grow up what are
you going to do for college I'm like I
don't really
know but when I see the dentist I don't
like that guy he pokes and prods and
makes my gums bleed but when I see the
eye doctor that guy's cool every part of
the eye exam is like black
magic I thought you know what I could be
that
guy and so that definitely influenced my
that amazing experience influenced me
and I think most eye doctors have some
experience like that where their life
was changed by what an amazing eye
doctor they had before and they just
want to pass that on I want to help
people have an amazing experience with
their eyesight and
experience the world and have more
freedom in their life to pursue
education to experience and see just the
beauty of color nature
really to experience the
world and so I really want to just give
that as a gift to as many people as I
can and I guess the confidence that it
gives those people as well as it did for
you at a young age MH isn't to be
underrated well thank God you did
because you know you've helped many
millions of people with a wide variety
of eye related issues and conditions and
helping them understand both the more
superficial elements of their eyes but
also the more sort of deeper Progressive
disas es that might risk taking away
their freedom in the ways that you've
described just there um but I just want
to say a big thank you for um let me
think of a nice eye related pun allowing
me to see more clearly as it relates to
the subject of Eye Health and vision and
and everything that's interconnected so
thank you so much Joseph you Stephen
appreciate you man this is
great I don't know how to say this you
in a way that you're going to understand
but perfect Ted is banging I'm an
investor in the company I drink it every
day the whole team drinks perfect Ted
every day we have a perfect headed
fridge in the office here's why I like
perfect Ted typical energy drinks used
to give me these crashes and as a
podcaster the last thing you want to do
is be crashing in a conversation the
founders of perfect Ted wanted to create
an energy drink that wouldn't create
that horrible crash cycle that many of
us go through so they used matcha as the
energy source and somehow they also made
it really really delicious they've just
come out with this new flavor called
juicy Peach and it is banging if you try
perfect TS juicy Peach and it's not
banging feel free to get in my DMs and
cuss me out you can pick it up at tesos
or waitr or you can get it online and
here's a secret that you've got to keep
to yourself I'm going to give you 40%
off perfect Ted just so you can try
juicy Peach yourself go to perfect
ted.com and at checkout put in the code
diary 40 I'm going to leave that up for
some time not forever that's perfect
ted.com and then use code diary 40 at
checkout when you try it make sure you
tag me on Instagram and and say Steve
you were right it's banging
a
[Music]